<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>XXII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-22" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>XXII</h2>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty suggested that she and Mary should go out together to purchase that day’s dinner, and by the time she had draped her shoulders in a shawl, buried her head in a bonnet, cautioned all her brood against going near the fireplace, the coal-box, and the slop-bucket, cut a slice of bread for each of them, and placed each of them in charge of all the rest, Mary’s more elaborate dressing was within two stages of her hat.</p>
			<p>“Wait until you have children, my dear,” said <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty, “you won’t be so pernickety then.” She further told Mary that when she was herself younger she had often spent an hour and a half doing up her hair, and she had been so particular that the putting on of a blouse or the pinning of a skirt to a belt had tormented her happily for two hours. “But, bless you,” she roared, “you get out of all that when you get children. Wait till you have six of them to be dressed every morning, and they with some of their boots lost and the rest of them mixed up, and each of them wriggling like an eel on a pan until you have to slap the devil out of them before their stocking can be got on: the way they screw their toes up in the wrong places and the way they squeal that you’re pinching them! and the way that they say you’ve rubbed soap in their eyes!”⁠—<abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty lifted her eyes and her hands to the ceiling in a dumb remonstrance with Providence, and dropped them again forlornly as one in whom Providence had never been really interested “you’ll have all the dressing you want, and a bit over for luck,” said she.</p>
			<p>She complimented Mary on her hair, her complexion, the smallness of her feet, the largeness of her eyes, the slenderness of her waist, the width of her hat and of her shoestrings: so impartially and inclusively did she compliment her that by the time they went out Mary was rosy with appreciation and as self-confident as a young girl is entitled to be.</p>
			<p>It was a beautiful grey day, with a massy sky which seemed as if it never could move again or change, and, as often happens in Ireland in cloudy weather, the air was so very clear that one could see to a great distance. On such days everything stands out in sharp outline. A street is no longer a congeries of houses huddling shamefully together and terrified lest anyone should look at them and laugh. Each house then recaptures its individuality. The very roadways are aware of themselves, and bear their horses and cars and trams in a competent spirit, adorned with modesty as with a garland. It has a beauty beyond sunshine, for sunshine is only youth and carelessness. The impress of a thousand memories, the historic visage, becomes apparent; the quiet face which experience has ripened into knowledge and mellowed into the wisdom of charity is seen then; the great social beauty shines from the streets under this sky that broods like a thoughtful forehead.</p>
			<p>While they walked <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty planned, as a general might, her campaign of shopping. Her shopping differed greatly from <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Makebelieve’s, and the difference was probably caused by her necessity to feed and clothe eight people as against <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Makebelieve’s two. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Makebelieve went to the shop nearest her house, and there entered into a staunch personal friendship with the proprietor. When she was given anything of doubtful value or material she instantly returned and handed it back, and the prices which were first quoted to her and settled upon became to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Makebelieve an unalterable standard from which no departure would be tolerated. Eggs might go up in price for the remainder of the world, but not for her. A change of price threw <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Makebelieve into so wide-eyed, so galvanic, so powerfully-verbal and friendship-shattering an anger that her terms were accepted and registered as Median exactitudes. <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty, on the other hand, knew shopkeepers as personal enemies and as foes to the human race, who were bent on despoiling the poor, and against whom a remorseless warfare should be conducted by all decent people. Her knowledge of material, of quality, of degrees of freshness, of local and distant prices was profound. In Clanbrassil Street she would quote the prices of Moore Street with shattering effect, and if the shopkeeper declined to revise his tariff her good-humoured voice toned so huge a disapproval that other intending purchasers left the shop impressed by the unmasking of a swindler. Her method was abrupt. She seized an article, placed it on the counter, and uttered these words, “Sixpence and not a penny more; I can get it in Moore Street for fivepence halfpenny.” She knew all the shops having a cheap line in some special article, and, therefore, her shopping was of a very extended description; not that she went from point to point, for she continually departed from the line of battle with the remark, “Let’s try what they have here,” and when inside the shop her large eye took in at a glance a thousand details of stock and price which were never afterwards forgotten.</p>
			<p><abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty’s daughter, Nora, was going to celebrate her first Communion in a few days. This is a very important ceremony for a young girl and for her mother. A white muslin dress and a blue sash, a white muslin hat with blue ribbons, tan shoes, and stockings as germane to the colour of tan as may be⁠—these all have to be provided. It is a time of grave concern for everybody intimately connected with the event. Every girl in the world has performed this ceremony: they have all been clad in these garments and shoes, and for a day or so all women, of whatever age, are in love with the little girl making her first Communion. Perhaps more than anything else it swings the passing stranger back to the time when she was not a woman but a child with present gaiety and curiosity, and a future all expectation and adventure. Therefore, the suitable apparelling of one’s daughter is a public duty, and every mother endeavours to do the thing that is right, and live, if only for one day, up to the admiration of her fellow-creatures.</p>
			<p>It was a trial, but an enjoyable one, to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty and Mary this matching of tan stockings with tan shoes. The shoes were bought, and then an almost impossible quest began to find stockings which would exactly go with them. Thousands of boxes were opened, ransacked, and waved aside without the absolute colour being discovered. From shop to shop and from street to street they went, and the quest led them through Grafton Street <i>en route</i> to a shop where, months before, <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty had seen stockings of a colour so nearly approximating to tan that they almost might be suitable.</p>
			<p>As they went past the College and entered the winding street Mary’s heart began to beat. She did not see any of the traffic flowing up and down, or the jostling, busy foot-passengers, nor did she hear the eager lectures of her companion. Her eyes were straining up the street towards the crossing. She dared not turn back or give any explanation to <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty, and in a few seconds she saw him, gigantic, calm, the adequate monarch of his world. His back was turned to her, and the great sweep of his shoulders, his solid legs, his red neck, and close-cropped, wiry hair were visible to her strangely. She had a peculiar feeling of acquaintness and of aloofness, intimate knowledge and a separation of sharp finality, caused her to stare at him with so intent a curiosity that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty noticed it.</p>
			<p>“That’s a fine man,” said she; “he won’t have to go about looking for girls.”</p>
			<p>As she spoke they passed by the policeman, and Mary knew that when her eyes left him his gaze almost automatically fell upon her. She was glad that he could not see her face. She was glad that <abbr>Mrs.</abbr> Cafferty was beside her: had she been alone she would have been tempted to walk away very quickly, almost to run, but her companion gave her courage and self-possession, so that she walked gallantly. But her mind was a fever. She could feel his eyes raking her from head to foot; she could see his great hand going up to tap his crinkly moustache. These things she could see in her terrified mind, but she could not think, she could only give thanks to God because she had her best clothes on.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
